System Objective & Core Mechanics Goal: To support users in live chat environments with personalized, context-aware conversational suggestions while actively preventing AI dependency. The system employs a progressive degradation strategy. Suggestions avoid explicit dialogue scripting. As the chat health improves, the AI visually degrades and structurally shifts its output from concrete advice to vague, meta-cognitive prompts. If the chat deteriorates, the system regresses to higher visibility and concrete support. steps: Decoupled Pipeline Architecture To achieve sub-second real-time latency while executing complex psychological analysis, the suggestion pipeline is strictly decoupled into two distinct stateless API processes. All user profiling and conversational context are stored in an Appwrite NoSQL database. Agent 1: Operates silently to maintain the conversational state without impacting UI latency. ● Trigger: Executes periodically based on message count thresholds (e.g., every 5 messages) or heuristic spikes (eg.increase in response time or major shift in mood/ topic) ● Execution: A stateless backend function fetches the user profiles, the current chat log, and the active Semantic Plan JSON document from Appwrite. It passes these to a heavy LLM via a direct API call to evaluate chat health, record chat context and generate plans of action, upon initial creation of the chat, a default semantic plan template will be created to be used as the opening. ● Output: Updates the Semantic Plan in Appwrite ● Context Decay (Garbage Collection): Appwrite’s native $updatedAt metadata governs context. If a chat is idle for > 12 hours, the backend forces a context reset. A scheduled CRON job permanently deletes Semantic Plans older than 30 days. json structure of the semantic plan: { "thread_id": "u_5512_u_9941", //identifier "current_role": "FRIEND", //the AI’s role to dictate suggestion style "macro_summary": "Users just matched. User 1 mentioned being stressed about a final project. User 2 hasn't responded yet.", //chat’s overall context "strategic_intent": "Use User 1's academic stress as a bonding opportunity to find common ground.",// the AI’s reasoning and thinking "user_1_context": "Stressed about academics. Needs to vent but might overshare.", //profiling "user_2_context": "Unknown/Passive. Needs an easy hook to reply.", //profiling "thematic_bounds": [ "Validate the stress of school projects.", "Pivot smoothly to ask if User 2 is dealing with similar deadlines." ], //topic of the chat “current_phase”: ”Phatic Communication” "action_plan": "Respond with empathetic curiosity. Keep the tone light and relatable, and suggest asking User 2 what their major is or if they are currently surviving finals week." } Agent 2 Operates exclusively when the user manually triggers the "Help me reply" UI. ● Trigger: Manual user invocation. ● Execution: Acts strictly as a data-formatting engine. The backend injects the dynamic boundaries from Agent 1 and a 3-5 message Sliding Window into a lightweight LLM API call. ● Output: Returns a strictly formatted JSON payload containing the UI nudge in under 1.5 seconds. Based on how the chat is going, agent 2 will take on a number of different roles, which will affect how the suggestion is generated: starting out smooth struggling neutral friend of a friend(letting you know about the other person and maybe a few conversation starter, but then dips) mentor(letting user try themselves while giving more vague hints or even just observing) adviser(more personalized and helpful advice, should still avoid telling user exactly what to say no matter what) Facilitator. Provide one nudge to sustain the current light topic, and one optional, low-pressure question to pivot slightly deeper. to transition between these roles, see Deterministic state management matrix below 3-Layer Risk & Boundary Enforcement To guarantee safety, the system utilizes a cascading risk mitigation strategy: ● Layer 1: The Pre-Generation Hard Gate (Toxicity & Spam) ○ paired with the risk detection algorithm, if the messages triggers the risk detection, it overrides the AI suggestion ● Layer 2: API-Level Structural Guardrailing (Anti-Plagiarism) ○ Mechanism: The backend injects absolute hardcoded laws into Agent 2's System Prompt ., it also checks for tricks like prompt injection and other harmful messages aimed to break the AI ○ Action: Enforces the rule that the AI must never output exact dialogue or quotation marks. It must output in valid JSON. This prevents the user from copy-pasting answers, forcing cognitive engagement. ● Layer 3: Output Parsing & Fallback (Hallucination Control) ○ Mechanism: The backend validates Agent 2's JSON response before sending it to the client. ○ Action: If the LLM hallucinates, outputs malformed JSON, or breaks a dynamic boundary, the backend catches the parsing error. Instead of crashing the frontend UI, it quietly triggers a generic fallback string (e.g., "Ask them to ….." ). Deterministic State Management & Signal Processing Matrix Agent 2 does not possess the autonomy to select its role or conversational strategy. The backend administrator strictly dictates the role by calculating raw behavioral signals to update the current_role string in the Appwrite database. To ensure low-latency performance and minimize LLM overhead, the system relies on quantitative heuristics acting as a "smoke alarm." The Signal The backend tracks two primary arrays of metadata without needing to run heavy NLP sentiment analysis on every message: 1. The Health Signals ($H$): Tracks organic conversational stability. ● Response Latency: The time delta between messages. Acts as the primary proxy for cognitive engagement. ● Message Length Parity: The character count ratio between users. Detects conversational narcissism and ensures mutual social effort. In text-based Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC), the absence of physical non-verbal cues forces time to act as the primary proxy for social engagement. Consequently, the system’s backend calculates chat health. In real-time environments, delays are actively attributed to negative relational signals such as rejection or disinterest ( Kalman et al., 2013 ), and these chronemic lapses directly cause interaction failure ( Lew et al., 2018 ). Message Length Parity prevents Conversational Narcissism ( Vangelisti, Knapp, & Daly 1990 ) a structural communication failure where one participant monopolizes the interaction, forcing the other into a passive audience role. In digital environments, reciprocal text volume is the primary mathematical indicator of Interactive Alignment ( Pickering & Garrod, 2004 ). Without tracking this character count ratio, the system would falsely classify a chat as "healthy" purely based on fast reply speeds, ignoring the fact that one user is carrying the entire cognitive load of the conversation. The Anomaly Trigger Human conversation occasionally produces structural anomalies, such as one user telling a long story or venting or one leaving to use the bathroom. Instead of hardcoding a mathematical state for every possible social scenario, the backend acts as a low-cost anomaly detector. ● The Trigger Mechanism: The backend constantly monitors for sudden, severe standard deviations in the raw signals (e.g., Parity suddenly dropping to 0.1, or Latency spiking exponentially). ● The Semantic Cross-Validation: When an anomaly is detected, the backend temporarily suspends any AI intervention and wakes up Agent 1 (The Background Strategist). Agent 1 reads the raw chat log to perform a semantic evaluation. ● The Resolution: If Agent 1 determines the anomaly is healthy (e.g., "User A is telling a story, User B is actively listening"), it instructs the backend to ignore the mathematical drop. If Agent 1 determines the anomaly is toxic (e.g., "User A is monopolizing the chat and ignoring User B"), it approves the state transition to rescue or fade out the chat. it does not blindly change the system state. Instead, it wakes up Agent 1 (The Background Strategist). Agent 1 reads the actual semantic text to verify if the chat is truly dying or just experiencing a natural lull, effectively cross-validating the dumb math with smart semantic analysis before finalizing the $H$ scores. 2. The Dependency Signals ($R$): Tracks the user's reliance on the AI. ● 10-Turn AI Call Ratio: Calculates what percentage of the last 10 messages were drafted using the AI. ○ It draws the mathematical boundary between communication augmentation (healthy) and communication replacement (toxic). If a user uses the AI 1 out of 10 times to get out of a rut, it is a tool. If they use it 8 out of 10 times, they are no longer participating in the conversation; they are a bystander to their own relationship. ○ This tracks the risks of Artificial Intelligence-Mediated Communication (AI-MC), a framework defined by Hancock, Naaman, and Levy (2020). Their research warns that hyper-reliance on AI generation fundamentally alters human interpersonal dynamics. A high AI Call Ratio indicates severe Algorithmic Dependence. When this happens, the authenticity and relational development of the chat collapses, because the connection is technically being formed between the receiving user and your AI, not the two humans. ● Zero-Keystroke Invocation: A conditional penalty that cross-references the user's semantic input with their wait time (invocation latency) before clicking the AI button. ○ It measures the complete absence of initial effort. If a user types "I like movies" and asks the AI to make it sound better, they provide the semantic seed. That is cognitive scaffolding . If they open a blank text box and just hit "Generate," they provide absolutely nothing. So we measure this by giving out penalty for not trying it themselves first by: Input is empty/gibberish AND $T_{invoke} < 5$ seconds., why 5 seconds: The Reading Speed Baseline: According to Rayner (1998) on the psychology of reading, the average adult reads at approximately 238 to 260 words per minute (roughly 4 words per second). The Motor Action (Fitts's Law, Card, S. K., Moran, T. P., & Newell, A. (1983). The Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.): It takes approximately 1 second(simplification) for a user to cognitively decide to press a button and physically move their thumb to hit it. If a match sends a standard 10 word message, it takes a human roughly 2.5 seconds just to physically scan the words, plus 1 second of motor action to hit the AI button. That totals roughly 3.5 seconds. We add a bit of buffer for a total of 5 seconds Therefore, if $T_{invoke} < 5$ seconds, it is physically impossible that the user read the message, processed its semantic meaning, attempted to formulate an independent response, failed, and then asked for help. A sub-5-second click is a pure, thoughtless reflex. It proves they are bypassing the cognitive process entirely. The user did not even try to read the message and think of a response. This is true maladaptive cognitive offloading. ○ This perfectly aligns with Cognitive Offloading theory (Risko & Gilbert, 2016) . Risko and Gilbert define offloading as using external tools to reduce the cognitive demands of a task. While strategic offloading is useful, a Zero-Keystroke Invocation represents maladaptive cognitive offloading . It correlates with a total collapse of intrinsic social motivation. The user is attempting to bypass the mental effort of social interaction entirely. we will put the four into a vector C. The State Transition Matrix (Deterministic Routing) The backend evaluates the four raw signals—Response Latency ($S_{lat}$), Message Parity ($S_{par}$), AI Call Ratio ($S_{rat}$), and the Latency-Conditioned Invocation Flag ($S_{inv}$)—as independent tripwires. The session is pushed through a hardcoded if/else hierarchy to assign the current AI role: Case 1: FRIEND (The Icebreaker) ● Condition: total_messages < 5 ● Action: Bypasses all signal evaluations. The cold-start problem poses the highest risk of abandonment for strangers. The system forces high-visibility UI and prioritizes profile matching to establish initial common ground before enough data exists to calculate behavioral baselines. Case 2: ADVISER (Emergency Rescue) ● Condition: $S_{lat} > \text{Critical Threshold} \lor (S_{par} < 0.2 \land \text{Anomaly\_Override} == \text{False})$ ● Action: Triggered strictly by failing chat health. The system recognizes the user is actively struggling to maintain the interaction. However, to prevent algorithmic dependence, the AI strictly avoids generating exact copy-paste scripts. Instead, it maximizes UI visibility to provide clear, structured, and tactical advice (e.g., framing techniques or specific topics to pivot to), acting as a conversational lifeline without doing the talking for them. Case 3: MENTOR (The Weaning State) ● Condition: $(S_{lat} == \text{Optimal} \land S_{par} \ge 0.4) \lor S_{rat} \ge 0.3 \lor S_{inv} == \text{True}$ ● Action: Triggered by either peak organic success or high synthetic dependency. The AI recognizes that heavy intervention is either no longer needed or actively harmful. It takes a deliberate step back, degrading the UI to offer only vague, high-level heuristics (rules of thumb) or Socratic questions. This forces the user to take the initiative, testing their independent social capability and weaning them off the algorithm. ● The Escape Hatch (Emergency Override): If the user experiences severe cognitive overload despite the heuristic, they can trigger a secondary "Force Assist" option. This temporarily overrides the dependency lock, escalating the system to the ADVISER role for a single turn to provide concrete lifelines, before resetting the state. To prevent abuse, this option is placed behind intentional UI friction (e.g., a secondary confirmation dialogue). Case 4: FACILITATOR (Standard Equilibrium) ● Condition: Fallback / Default (None of the above conditions are met) ● Action: The default operational state. The chat is stable, and the user is behaving normally. Neither health nor dependency signals have tripped a critical threshold. The AI maintains medium UI visibility (a standard, unobtrusive button) and offers light thematic nudges to sustain the current topic without being overbearing. 6. Frontend Visual Mapping The UI dynamically reacts to the current_role assigned by the backend to manage user expectations and introduce intentional interaction friction: ● High Visibility (Primary CTA / Distinct Box): FRIEND , ADVISER . The AI is actively trying to establish common ground or rescue a failing chat. The UI is prominent, fully colored, and clearly invites interaction to deliver structured guidance. ● Medium Visibility (Standard Chat Button): FACILITATOR . The default equilibrium state. The AI button is present but unobtrusive, ready to offer light thematic nudges without dominating the screen space. ● Deprioritized Visibility (Minimal Icon / Tooltip UI): MENTOR . The system actively restricts the AI generation. The button visually shifts to a restricted state. Interaction opens a tooltip delivering heuristics rather than a text-generation box. A secondary, visually muted "Force Assist" text link is available within the tooltip as a fail-safe escape hatch, requiring a two-tap confirmation to activate. 